<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>A Respectable Woman</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="a-respectable-woman" epub:type="volume se:short-story">


<h2>
  A Respectable Woman
</h2>
<p>
  Mrs. Baroda was a little provoked to learn that her husband expected his
  friend, Gouvernail, up to spend a week or two on the plantation.
</p>
<p>
  They had entertained a good deal during the winter; much of the time had
  also been passed in New Orleans in various forms of mild dissipation. She
  was looking forward to a period of unbroken rest, now, and undisturbed
  tete-a-tete with her husband, when he informed her that Gouvernail was
  coming up to stay a week or two.
</p>
<p>
  This was a man she had heard much of but never seen. He had been her
  husband's college friend; was now a journalist, and in no sense a society
  man or &ldquo;a man about town,&rdquo; which were, perhaps, some of the reasons she
  had never met him. But she had unconsciously formed an image of him in her
  mind. She pictured him tall, slim, cynical; with eye-glasses, and his
  hands in his pockets; and she did not like him. Gouvernail was slim
  enough, but he wasn't very tall nor very cynical; neither did he wear
  eyeglasses nor carry his hands in his pockets. And she rather liked him
  when he first presented himself.
</p>
<p>
  But why she liked him she could not explain satisfactorily to herself when
  she partly attempted to do so. She could discover in him none of those
  brilliant and promising traits which Gaston, her husband, had often
  assured her that he possessed. On the contrary, he sat rather mute and
  receptive before her chatty eagerness to make him feel at home and in face
  of Gaston's frank and wordy hospitality. His manner was as courteous
  toward her as the most exacting woman could require; but he made no direct
  appeal to her approval or even esteem.
</p>
<p>
  Once settled at the plantation he seemed to like to sit upon the wide
  portico in the shade of one of the big Corinthian pillars, smoking his
  cigar lazily and listening attentively to Gaston's experience as a sugar
  planter.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;This is what I call living,&rdquo; he would utter with deep satisfaction, as
  the air that swept across the sugar field caressed him with its warm and
  scented velvety touch. It pleased him also to get on familiar terms with
  the big dogs that came about him, rubbing themselves sociably against his
  legs. He did not care to fish, and displayed no eagerness to go out and
  kill grosbecs when Gaston proposed doing so.
</p>
<p>
  Gouvernail's personality puzzled Mrs. Baroda, but she liked him. Indeed,
  he was a lovable, inoffensive fellow. After a few days, when she could
  understand him no better than at first, she gave over being puzzled and
  remained piqued. In this mood she left her husband and her guest, for the
  most part, alone together. Then finding that Gouvernail took no manner of
  exception to her action, she imposed her society upon him, accompanying
  him in his idle strolls to the mill and walks along the batture. She
  persistently sought to penetrate the reserve in which he had unconsciously
  enveloped himself.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;When is he going&mdash;your friend?&rdquo; she one day asked her husband. &ldquo;For
  my part, he tires me frightfully.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Not for a week yet, dear. I can't understand; he gives you no trouble.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No. I should like him better if he did; if he were more like others, and
  I had to plan somewhat for his comfort and enjoyment.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Gaston took his wife's pretty face between his hands and looked tenderly
  and laughingly into her troubled eyes.
</p>
<p>
  They were making a bit of toilet sociably together in Mrs. Baroda's
  dressing-room.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;You are full of surprises, ma belle,&rdquo; he said to her. &ldquo;Even I can never
  count upon how you are going to act under given conditions.&rdquo; He kissed her
  and turned to fasten his cravat before the mirror.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Here you are,&rdquo; he went on, &ldquo;taking poor Gouvernail seriously and making a
  commotion over him, the last thing he would desire or expect.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Commotion!&rdquo; she hotly resented. &ldquo;Nonsense! How can you say such a thing?
  Commotion, indeed! But, you know, you said he was clever.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;So he is. But the poor fellow is run down by overwork now. That's why I
  asked him here to take a rest.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;You used to say he was a man of ideas,&rdquo; she retorted, unconciliated. &ldquo;I
  expected him to be interesting, at least. I'm going to the city in the
  morning to have my spring gowns fitted. Let me know when Mr. Gouvernail is
  gone; I shall be at my Aunt Octavie's.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  That night she went and sat alone upon a bench that stood beneath a live
  oak tree at the edge of the gravel walk.
</p>
<p>
  She had never known her thoughts or her intentions to be so confused. She
  could gather nothing from them but the feeling of a distinct necessity to
  quit her home in the morning.
</p>
<p>
  Mrs. Baroda heard footsteps crunching the gravel; but could discern in the
  darkness only the approaching red point of a lighted cigar. She knew it
  was Gouvernail, for her husband did not smoke. She hoped to remain
  unnoticed, but her white gown revealed her to him. He threw away his cigar
  and seated himself upon the bench beside her; without a suspicion that she
  might object to his presence.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Your husband told me to bring this to you, Mrs. Baroda,&rdquo; he said, handing
  her a filmy, white scarf with which she sometimes enveloped her head and
  shoulders. She accepted the scarf from him with a murmur of thanks, and
  let it lie in her lap.
</p>
<p>
  He made some commonplace observation upon the baneful effect of the night
  air at the season. Then as his gaze reached out into the darkness, he
  murmured, half to himself:
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;'Night of south winds&mdash;night of the large few stars! Still nodding
  night&mdash;'&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  She made no reply to this apostrophe to the night, which, indeed, was not
  addressed to her.
</p>
<p>
  Gouvernail was in no sense a diffident man, for he was not a
  self-conscious one. His periods of reserve were not constitutional, but
  the result of moods. Sitting there beside Mrs. Baroda, his silence melted
  for the time.
</p>
<p>
  He talked freely and intimately in a low, hesitating drawl that was not
  unpleasant to hear. He talked of the old college days when he and Gaston
  had been a good deal to each other; of the days of keen and blind
  ambitions and large intentions. Now there was left with him, at least, a
  philosophic acquiescence to the existing order&mdash;only a desire to be
  permitted to exist, with now and then a little whiff of genuine life, such
  as he was breathing now.
</p>
<p>
  Her mind only vaguely grasped what he was saying. Her physical being was
  for the moment predominant. She was not thinking of his words, only
  drinking in the tones of his voice. She wanted to reach out her hand in
  the darkness and touch him with the sensitive tips of her fingers upon the
  face or the lips. She wanted to draw close to him and whisper against his
  cheek&mdash;she did not care what&mdash;as she might have done if she had
  not been a respectable woman.
</p>
<p>
  The stronger the impulse grew to bring herself near him, the further, in
  fact, did she draw away from him. As soon as she could do so without an
  appearance of too great rudeness, she rose and left him there alone.
</p>
<p>
  Before she reached the house, Gouvernail had lighted a fresh cigar and
  ended his apostrophe to the night.
</p>
<p>
  Mrs. Baroda was greatly tempted that night to tell her husband&mdash;who
  was also her friend&mdash;of this folly that had seized her. But she did
  not yield to the temptation. Beside being a respectable woman she was a
  very sensible one; and she knew there are some battles in life which a
  human being must fight alone.
</p>
<p>
  When Gaston arose in the morning, his wife had already departed. She had
  taken an early morning train to the city. She did not return till
  Gouvernail was gone from under her roof.
</p>
<p>
  There was some talk of having him back during the summer that followed.
  That is, Gaston greatly desired it; but this desire yielded to his wife's
  strenuous opposition.
</p>
<p>
  However, before the year ended, she proposed, wholly from herself, to have
  Gouvernail visit them again. Her husband was surprised and delighted with
  the suggestion coming from her.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I am glad, chere amie, to know that you have finally overcome your
  dislike for him; truly he did not deserve it.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Oh,&rdquo; she told him, laughingly, after pressing a long, tender kiss upon
  his lips, &ldquo;I have overcome everything! you will see. This time I shall be
  very nice to him.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  <a name="link2H_4_0049" id="link2H_4_0049">
  <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
  <br /><br /><br /><br />
</div>
</section></body></html>
