<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>The Kiss</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="the-kiss" epub:type="volume se:short-story">

<h2>
  The Kiss
</h2>
<p>
  It was still quite light out of doors, but inside with the curtains drawn
  and the smouldering fire sending out a dim, uncertain glow, the room was
  full of deep shadows.
</p>
<p>
  Brantain sat in one of these shadows; it had overtaken him and he did not
  mind. The obscurity lent him courage to keep his eyes fastened as ardently
  as he liked upon the girl who sat in the firelight.
</p>
<p>
  She was very handsome, with a certain fine, rich coloring that belongs to
  the healthy brune type. She was quite composed, as she idly stroked the
  satiny coat of the cat that lay curled in her lap, and she occasionally
  sent a slow glance into the shadow where her companion sat. They were
  talking low, of indifferent things which plainly were not the things that
  occupied their thoughts. She knew that he loved her&mdash;a frank,
  blustering fellow without guile enough to conceal his feelings, and no
  desire to do so. For two weeks past he had sought her society eagerly and
  persistently. She was confidently waiting for him to declare himself and
  she meant to accept him. The rather insignificant and unattractive
  Brantain was enormously rich; and she liked and required the entourage
  which wealth could give her.
</p>
<p>
  During one of the pauses between their talk of the last tea and the next
  reception the door opened and a young man entered whom Brantain knew quite
  well. The girl turned her face toward him. A stride or two brought him to
  her side, and bending over her chair&mdash;before she could suspect his
  intention, for she did not realize that he had not seen her visitor&mdash;he
  pressed an ardent, lingering kiss upon her lips.
</p>
<p>
  Brantain slowly arose; so did the girl arise, but quickly, and the
  newcomer stood between them, a little amusement and some defiance
  struggling with the confusion in his face.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I believe,&rdquo; stammered Brantain, &ldquo;I see that I have stayed too long. I&mdash;I
  had no idea&mdash;that is, I must wish you good-by.&rdquo; He was clutching his
  hat with both hands, and probably did not perceive that she was extending
  her hand to him, her presence of mind had not completely deserted her; but
  she could not have trusted herself to speak.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Hang me if I saw him sitting there, Nattie! I know it's deuced awkward
  for you. But I hope you'll forgive me this once&mdash;this very first
  break. Why, what's the matter?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Don't touch me; don't come near me,&rdquo; she returned angrily. &ldquo;What do you
  mean by entering the house without ringing?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I came in with your brother, as I often do,&rdquo; he answered coldly, in
  self-justification. &ldquo;We came in the side way. He went upstairs and I came
  in here hoping to find you. The explanation is simple enough and ought to
  satisfy you that the misadventure was unavoidable. But do say that you
  forgive me, Nathalie,&rdquo; he entreated, softening.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Forgive you! You don't know what you are talking about. Let me pass. It
  depends upon&mdash;a good deal whether I ever forgive you.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  At that next reception which she and Brantain had been talking about she
  approached the young man with a delicious frankness of manner when she saw
  him there.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Will you let me speak to you a moment or two, Mr. Brantain?&rdquo; she asked
  with an engaging but perturbed smile. He seemed extremely unhappy; but
  when she took his arm and walked away with him, seeking a retired corner,
  a ray of hope mingled with the almost comical misery of his expression.
  She was apparently very outspoken.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Perhaps I should not have sought this interview, Mr. Brantain; but&mdash;but,
  oh, I have been very uncomfortable, almost miserable since that little
  encounter the other afternoon. When I thought how you might have
  misinterpreted it, and believed things&rdquo;&mdash;hope was plainly gaining the
  ascendancy over misery in Brantain's round, guileless face&mdash;&ldquo;Of
  course, I know it is nothing to you, but for my own sake I do want you to
  understand that Mr. Harvy is an intimate friend of long standing. Why, we
  have always been like cousins&mdash;like brother and sister, I may say. He
  is my brother's most intimate associate and often fancies that he is
  entitled to the same privileges as the family. Oh, I know it is absurd,
  uncalled for, to tell you this; undignified even,&rdquo; she was almost weeping,
  &ldquo;but it makes so much difference to me what you think of&mdash;of me.&rdquo; Her
  voice had grown very low and agitated. The misery had all disappeared from
  Brantain's face.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Then you do really care what I think, Miss Nathalie? May I call you Miss
  Nathalie?&rdquo; They turned into a long, dim corridor that was lined on either
  side with tall, graceful plants. They walked slowly to the very end of it.
  When they turned to retrace their steps Brantain's face was radiant and
  hers was triumphant.
</p>
<p>
  Harvy was among the guests at the wedding; and he sought her out in a rare
  moment when she stood alone.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Your husband,&rdquo; he said, smiling, &ldquo;has sent me over to kiss you.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  A quick blush suffused her face and round polished throat. &ldquo;I suppose it's
  natural for a man to feel and act generously on an occasion of this kind.
  He tells me he doesn't want his marriage to interrupt wholly that pleasant
  intimacy which has existed between you and me. I don't know what you've
  been telling him,&rdquo; with an insolent smile, &ldquo;but he has sent me here to
  kiss you.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  She felt like a chess player who, by the clever handling of his pieces,
  sees the game taking the course intended. Her eyes were bright and tender
  with a smile as they glanced up into his; and her lips looked hungry for
  the kiss which they invited.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But, you know,&rdquo; he went on quietly, &ldquo;I didn't tell him so, it would have
  seemed ungrateful, but I can tell you. I've stopped kissing women; it's
  dangerous.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Well, she had Brantain and his million left. A person can't have
  everything in this world; and it was a little unreasonable of her to
  expect it.
</p>
<p>
  <a name="link2H_4_0050" id="link2H_4_0050">
  <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
  <br /><br /><br /><br />
</div>
</section></body></html>
