<h2>
  A RESPECTABLE WOMAN
</h2>
<p>
  Mrs. Baroda was a little provoked to learn that her husband expected his
  friend, Gouvernail, up to spend a week or two on the plantation.
</p>
<p>
  They had entertained a good deal during the winter; much of the time had
  also been passed in New Orleans in various forms of mild dissipation. She
  was looking forward to a period of unbroken rest, now, and undisturbed
  tete-a-tete with her husband, when he informed her that Gouvernail was
  coming up to stay a week or two.
</p>
<p>
  This was a man she had heard much of but never seen. He had been her
  husband's college friend; was now a journalist, and in no sense a society
  man or &ldquo;a man about town,&rdquo; which were, perhaps, some of the reasons she
  had never met him. But she had unconsciously formed an image of him in her
  mind. She pictured him tall, slim, cynical; with eye-glasses, and his
  hands in his pockets; and she did not like him. Gouvernail was slim
  enough, but he wasn't very tall nor very cynical; neither did he wear
  eyeglasses nor carry his hands in his pockets. And she rather liked him
  when he first presented himself.
</p>
<p>
  But why she liked him she could not explain satisfactorily to herself when
  she partly attempted to do so. She could discover in him none of those
  brilliant and promising traits which Gaston, her husband, had often
  assured her that he possessed. On the contrary, he sat rather mute and
  receptive before her chatty eagerness to make him feel at home and in face
  of Gaston's frank and wordy hospitality. His manner was as courteous
  toward her as the most exacting woman could require; but he made no direct
  appeal to her approval or even esteem.
</p>
<p>
  Once settled at the plantation he seemed to like to sit upon the wide
  portico in the shade of one of the big Corinthian pillars, smoking his
  cigar lazily and listening attentively to Gaston's experience as a sugar
  planter.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;This is what I call living,&rdquo; he would utter with deep satisfaction, as
  the air that swept across the sugar field caressed him with its warm and
  scented velvety touch. It pleased him also to get on familiar terms with
  the big dogs that came about him, rubbing themselves sociably against his
  legs. He did not care to fish, and displayed no eagerness to go out and
  kill grosbecs when Gaston proposed doing so.
</p>
<p>
  Gouvernail's personality puzzled Mrs. Baroda, but she liked him. Indeed,
  he was a lovable, inoffensive fellow. After a few days, when she could
  understand him no better than at first, she gave over being puzzled and
  remained piqued. In this mood she left her husband and her guest, for the
  most part, alone together. Then finding that Gouvernail took no manner of
  exception to her action, she imposed her society upon him, accompanying
  him in his idle strolls to the mill and walks along the batture. She
  persistently sought to penetrate the reserve in which he had unconsciously
  enveloped himself.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;When is he going&mdash;your friend?&rdquo; she one day asked her husband. &ldquo;For
  my part, he tires me frightfully.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Not for a week yet, dear. I can't understand; he gives you no trouble.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No. I should like him better if he did; if he were more like others, and
  I had to plan somewhat for his comfort and enjoyment.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Gaston took his wife's pretty face between his hands and looked tenderly
  and laughingly into her troubled eyes.
</p>
<p>
  They were making a bit of toilet sociably together in Mrs. Baroda's
  dressing-room.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;You are full of surprises, ma belle,&rdquo; he said to her. &ldquo;Even I can never
  count upon how you are going to act under given conditions.&rdquo; He kissed her
  and turned to fasten his cravat before the mirror.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Here you are,&rdquo; he went on, &ldquo;taking poor Gouvernail seriously and making a
  commotion over him, the last thing he would desire or expect.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Commotion!&rdquo; she hotly resented. &ldquo;Nonsense! How can you say such a thing?
  Commotion, indeed! But, you know, you said he was clever.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;So he is. But the poor fellow is run down by overwork now. That's why I
  asked him here to take a rest.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;You used to say he was a man of ideas,&rdquo; she retorted, unconciliated. &ldquo;I
  expected him to be interesting, at least. I'm going to the city in the
  morning to have my spring gowns fitted. Let me know when Mr. Gouvernail is
  gone; I shall be at my Aunt Octavie's.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  That night she went and sat alone upon a bench that stood beneath a live
  oak tree at the edge of the gravel walk.
</p>
<p>
  She had never known her thoughts or her intentions to be so confused. She
  could gather nothing from them but the feeling of a distinct necessity to
  quit her home in the morning.
</p>
<p>
  Mrs. Baroda heard footsteps crunching the gravel; but could discern in the
  darkness only the approaching red point of a lighted cigar. She knew it
  was Gouvernail, for her husband did not smoke. She hoped to remain
  unnoticed, but her white gown revealed her to him. He threw away his cigar
  and seated himself upon the bench beside her; without a suspicion that she
  might object to his presence.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Your husband told me to bring this to you, Mrs. Baroda,&rdquo; he said, handing
  her a filmy, white scarf with which she sometimes enveloped her head and
  shoulders. She accepted the scarf from him with a murmur of thanks, and
  let it lie in her lap.
</p>
<p>
  He made some commonplace observation upon the baneful effect of the night
  air at the season. Then as his gaze reached out into the darkness, he
  murmured, half to himself:
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;'Night of south winds&mdash;night of the large few stars! Still nodding
  night&mdash;'&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  She made no reply to this apostrophe to the night, which, indeed, was not
  addressed to her.
</p>
<p>
  Gouvernail was in no sense a diffident man, for he was not a
  self-conscious one. His periods of reserve were not constitutional, but
  the result of moods. Sitting there beside Mrs. Baroda, his silence melted
  for the time.
</p>
<p>
  He talked freely and intimately in a low, hesitating drawl that was not
  unpleasant to hear. He talked of the old college days when he and Gaston
  had been a good deal to each other; of the days of keen and blind
  ambitions and large intentions. Now there was left with him, at least, a
  philosophic acquiescence to the existing order&mdash;only a desire to be
  permitted to exist, with now and then a little whiff of genuine life, such
  as he was breathing now.
</p>
<p>
  Her mind only vaguely grasped what he was saying. Her physical being was
  for the moment predominant. She was not thinking of his words, only
  drinking in the tones of his voice. She wanted to reach out her hand in
  the darkness and touch him with the sensitive tips of her fingers upon the
  face or the lips. She wanted to draw close to him and whisper against his
  cheek&mdash;she did not care what&mdash;as she might have done if she had
  not been a respectable woman.
</p>
<p>
  The stronger the impulse grew to bring herself near him, the further, in
  fact, did she draw away from him. As soon as she could do so without an
  appearance of too great rudeness, she rose and left him there alone.
</p>
<p>
  Before she reached the house, Gouvernail had lighted a fresh cigar and
  ended his apostrophe to the night.
</p>
<p>
  Mrs. Baroda was greatly tempted that night to tell her husband&mdash;who
  was also her friend&mdash;of this folly that had seized her. But she did
  not yield to the temptation. Beside being a respectable woman she was a
  very sensible one; and she knew there are some battles in life which a
  human being must fight alone.
</p>
<p>
  When Gaston arose in the morning, his wife had already departed. She had
  taken an early morning train to the city. She did not return till
  Gouvernail was gone from under her roof.
</p>
<p>
  There was some talk of having him back during the summer that followed.
  That is, Gaston greatly desired it; but this desire yielded to his wife's
  strenuous opposition.
</p>
<p>
  However, before the year ended, she proposed, wholly from herself, to have
  Gouvernail visit them again. Her husband was surprised and delighted with
  the suggestion coming from her.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I am glad, chere amie, to know that you have finally overcome your
  dislike for him; truly he did not deserve it.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Oh,&rdquo; she told him, laughingly, after pressing a long, tender kiss upon
  his lips, &ldquo;I have overcome everything! you will see. This time I shall be
  very nice to him.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  <a name="link2H_4_0049" id="link2H_4_0049">
  <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
  <br /><br /><br /><br />
</div>
<h2>
  THE KISS
</h2>
<p>
  It was still quite light out of doors, but inside with the curtains drawn
  and the smouldering fire sending out a dim, uncertain glow, the room was
  full of deep shadows.
</p>
<p>
  Brantain sat in one of these shadows; it had overtaken him and he did not
  mind. The obscurity lent him courage to keep his eyes fastened as ardently
  as he liked upon the girl who sat in the firelight.
</p>
<p>
  She was very handsome, with a certain fine, rich coloring that belongs to
  the healthy brune type. She was quite composed, as she idly stroked the
  satiny coat of the cat that lay curled in her lap, and she occasionally
  sent a slow glance into the shadow where her companion sat. They were
  talking low, of indifferent things which plainly were not the things that
  occupied their thoughts. She knew that he loved her&mdash;a frank,
  blustering fellow without guile enough to conceal his feelings, and no
  desire to do so. For two weeks past he had sought her society eagerly and
  persistently. She was confidently waiting for him to declare himself and
  she meant to accept him. The rather insignificant and unattractive
  Brantain was enormously rich; and she liked and required the entourage
  which wealth could give her.
</p>
<p>
  During one of the pauses between their talk of the last tea and the next
  reception the door opened and a young man entered whom Brantain knew quite
  well. The girl turned her face toward him. A stride or two brought him to
  her side, and bending over her chair&mdash;before she could suspect his
  intention, for she did not realize that he had not seen her visitor&mdash;he
  pressed an ardent, lingering kiss upon her lips.
</p>
<p>
  Brantain slowly arose; so did the girl arise, but quickly, and the
  newcomer stood between them, a little amusement and some defiance
  struggling with the confusion in his face.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I believe,&rdquo; stammered Brantain, &ldquo;I see that I have stayed too long. I&mdash;I
  had no idea&mdash;that is, I must wish you good-by.&rdquo; He was clutching his
  hat with both hands, and probably did not perceive that she was extending
  her hand to him, her presence of mind had not completely deserted her; but
  she could not have trusted herself to speak.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Hang me if I saw him sitting there, Nattie! I know it's deuced awkward
  for you. But I hope you'll forgive me this once&mdash;this very first
  break. Why, what's the matter?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Don't touch me; don't come near me,&rdquo; she returned angrily. &ldquo;What do you
  mean by entering the house without ringing?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I came in with your brother, as I often do,&rdquo; he answered coldly, in
  self-justification. &ldquo;We came in the side way. He went upstairs and I came
  in here hoping to find you. The explanation is simple enough and ought to
  satisfy you that the misadventure was unavoidable. But do say that you
  forgive me, Nathalie,&rdquo; he entreated, softening.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Forgive you! You don't know what you are talking about. Let me pass. It
  depends upon&mdash;a good deal whether I ever forgive you.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  At that next reception which she and Brantain had been talking about she
  approached the young man with a delicious frankness of manner when she saw
  him there.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Will you let me speak to you a moment or two, Mr. Brantain?&rdquo; she asked
  with an engaging but perturbed smile. He seemed extremely unhappy; but
  when she took his arm and walked away with him, seeking a retired corner,
  a ray of hope mingled with the almost comical misery of his expression.
  She was apparently very outspoken.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Perhaps I should not have sought this interview, Mr. Brantain; but&mdash;but,
  oh, I have been very uncomfortable, almost miserable since that little
  encounter the other afternoon. When I thought how you might have
  misinterpreted it, and believed things&rdquo;&mdash;hope was plainly gaining the
  ascendancy over misery in Brantain's round, guileless face&mdash;&ldquo;Of
  course, I know it is nothing to you, but for my own sake I do want you to
  understand that Mr. Harvy is an intimate friend of long standing. Why, we
  have always been like cousins&mdash;like brother and sister, I may say. He
  is my brother's most intimate associate and often fancies that he is
  entitled to the same privileges as the family. Oh, I know it is absurd,
  uncalled for, to tell you this; undignified even,&rdquo; she was almost weeping,
  &ldquo;but it makes so much difference to me what you think of&mdash;of me.&rdquo; Her
  voice had grown very low and agitated. The misery had all disappeared from
  Brantain's face.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Then you do really care what I think, Miss Nathalie? May I call you Miss
  Nathalie?&rdquo; They turned into a long, dim corridor that was lined on either
  side with tall, graceful plants. They walked slowly to the very end of it.
  When they turned to retrace their steps Brantain's face was radiant and
  hers was triumphant.
</p>
<p>
  Harvy was among the guests at the wedding; and he sought her out in a rare
  moment when she stood alone.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Your husband,&rdquo; he said, smiling, &ldquo;has sent me over to kiss you.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  A quick blush suffused her face and round polished throat. &ldquo;I suppose it's
  natural for a man to feel and act generously on an occasion of this kind.
  He tells me he doesn't want his marriage to interrupt wholly that pleasant
  intimacy which has existed between you and me. I don't know what you've
  been telling him,&rdquo; with an insolent smile, &ldquo;but he has sent me here to
  kiss you.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  She felt like a chess player who, by the clever handling of his pieces,
  sees the game taking the course intended. Her eyes were bright and tender
  with a smile as they glanced up into his; and her lips looked hungry for
  the kiss which they invited.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But, you know,&rdquo; he went on quietly, &ldquo;I didn't tell him so, it would have
  seemed ungrateful, but I can tell you. I've stopped kissing women; it's
  dangerous.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Well, she had Brantain and his million left. A person can't have
  everything in this world; and it was a little unreasonable of her to
  expect it.
</p>
<p>
  <a name="link2H_4_0050" id="link2H_4_0050">
  <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
  <br /><br /><br /><br />
</div>
<h2>
  A PAIR OF SILK STOCKINGS
</h2>
<p>
  Little Mrs. Sommers one day found herself the unexpected possessor of
  fifteen dollars. It seemed to her a very large amount of money, and the
  way in which it stuffed and bulged her worn old porte-monnaie gave her a
  feeling of importance such as she had not enjoyed for years.
</p>
<p>
  The question of investment was one that occupied her greatly. For a day or
  two she walked about apparently in a dreamy state, but really absorbed in
  speculation and calculation. She did not wish to act hastily, to do
  anything she might afterward regret. But it was during the still hours of
  the night when she lay awake revolving plans in her mind that she seemed
  to see her way clearly toward a proper and judicious use of the money.
</p>
<p>
  A dollar or two should be added to the price usually paid for Janie's
  shoes, which would insure their lasting an appreciable time longer than
  they usually did. She would buy so and so many yards of percale for new
  shirt waists for the boys and Janie and Mag. She had intended to make the
  old ones do by skilful patching. Mag should have another gown. She had
  seen some beautiful patterns, veritable bargains in the shop windows. And
  still there would be left enough for new stockings&mdash;two pairs apiece&mdash;and
  what darning that would save for a while! She would get caps for the boys
  and sailor-hats for the girls. The vision of her little brood looking
  fresh and dainty and new for once in their lives excited her and made her
  restless and wakeful with anticipation.
</p>
<p>
  The neighbors sometimes talked of certain &ldquo;better days&rdquo; that little Mrs.
  Sommers had known before she had ever thought of being Mrs. Sommers. She
  herself indulged in no such morbid retrospection. She had no time&mdash;no
  second of time to devote to the past. The needs of the present absorbed
  her every faculty. A vision of the future like some dim, gaunt monster
  sometimes appalled her, but luckily to-morrow never comes.
</p>
<p>
  Mrs. Sommers was one who knew the value of bargains; who could stand for
  hours making her way inch by inch toward the desired object that was
  selling below cost. She could elbow her way if need be; she had learned to
  clutch a piece of goods and hold it and stick to it with persistence and
  determination till her turn came to be served, no matter when it came.
</p>
<p>
  But that day she was a little faint and tired. She had swallowed a light
  luncheon&mdash;no! when she came to think of it, between getting the
  children fed and the place righted, and preparing herself for the shopping
  bout, she had actually forgotten to eat any luncheon at all!
</p>
<p>
  She sat herself upon a revolving stool before a counter that was
  comparatively deserted, trying to gather strength and courage to charge
  through an eager multitude that was besieging breastworks of shirting and
  figured lawn. An all-gone limp feeling had come over her and she rested
  her hand aimlessly upon the counter. She wore no gloves. By degrees she
  grew aware that her hand had encountered something very soothing, very
  pleasant to touch. She looked down to see that her hand lay upon a pile of
  silk stockings. A placard near by announced that they had been reduced in
  price from two dollars and fifty cents to one dollar and ninety-eight
  cents; and a young girl who stood behind the counter asked her if she
  wished to examine their line of silk hosiery. She smiled, just as if she
  had been asked to inspect a tiara of diamonds with the ultimate view of
  purchasing it. But she went on feeling the soft, sheeny luxurious things&mdash;with
  both hands now, holding them up to see them glisten, and to feel them
  glide serpent-like through her fingers.
</p>
<p>
  Two hectic blotches came suddenly into her pale cheeks. She looked up at
  the girl.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Do you think there are any eights-and-a-half among these?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  There were any number of eights-and-a-half. In fact, there were more of
  that size than any other. Here was a light-blue pair; there were some
  lavender, some all black and various shades of tan and gray. Mrs. Sommers
  selected a black pair and looked at them very long and closely. She
  pretended to be examining their texture, which the clerk assured her was
  excellent.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;A dollar and ninety-eight cents,&rdquo; she mused aloud. &ldquo;Well, I'll take this
  pair.&rdquo; She handed the girl a five-dollar bill and waited for her change
  and for her parcel. What a very small parcel it was! It seemed lost in the
  depths of her shabby old shopping-bag.
</p>
<p>
  Mrs. Sommers after that did not move in the direction of the bargain
  counter. She took the elevator, which carried her to an upper floor into
  the region of the ladies' waiting-rooms. Here, in a retired corner, she
  exchanged her cotton stockings for the new silk ones which she had just
  bought. She was not going through any acute mental process or reasoning
  with herself, nor was she striving to explain to her satisfaction the
  motive of her action. She was not thinking at all. She seemed for the time
  to be taking a rest from that laborious and fatiguing function and to have
  abandoned herself to some mechanical impulse that directed her actions and
  freed her of responsibility.
</p>
<p>
  How good was the touch of the raw silk to her flesh! She felt like lying
  back in the cushioned chair and reveling for a while in the luxury of it.
  She did for a little while. Then she replaced her shoes, rolled the cotton
  stockings together and thrust them into her bag. After doing this she
  crossed straight over to the shoe department and took her seat to be
  fitted.
</p>
<p>
  She was fastidious. The clerk could not make her out; he could not
  reconcile her shoes with her stockings, and she was not too easily
  pleased. She held back her skirts and turned her feet one way and her head
  another way as she glanced down at the polished, pointed-tipped boots. Her
  foot and ankle looked very pretty. She could not realize that they
  belonged to her and were a part of herself. She wanted an excellent and
  stylish fit, she told the young fellow who served her, and she did not
  mind the difference of a dollar or two more in the price so long as she
  got what she desired.
</p>
<p>
  It was a long time since Mrs. Sommers had been fitted with gloves. On rare
  occasions when she had bought a pair they were always &ldquo;bargains,&rdquo; so cheap
  that it would have been preposterous and unreasonable to have expected
  them to be fitted to the hand.
</p>
<p>
  Now she rested her elbow on the cushion of the glove counter, and a
  pretty, pleasant young creature, delicate and deft of touch, drew a
  long-wristed &ldquo;kid&rdquo; over Mrs. Sommers's hand. She smoothed it down over the
  wrist and buttoned it neatly, and both lost themselves for a second or two
  in admiring contemplation of the little symmetrical gloved hand. But there
  were other places where money might be spent.
</p>
<p>
  There were books and magazines piled up in the window of a stall a few
  paces down the street. Mrs. Sommers bought two high-priced magazines such
  as she had been accustomed to read in the days when she had been
  accustomed to other pleasant things. She carried them without wrapping. As
  well as she could she lifted her skirts at the crossings. Her stockings
  and boots and well fitting gloves had worked marvels in her bearing&mdash;had
  given her a feeling of assurance, a sense of belonging to the well-dressed
  multitude.
</p>
<p>
  She was very hungry. Another time she would have stilled the cravings for
  food until reaching her own home, where she would have brewed herself a
  cup of tea and taken a snack of anything that was available. But the
  impulse that was guiding her would not suffer her to entertain any such
  thought.
</p>
<p>
  There was a restaurant at the corner. She had never entered its doors;
  from the outside she had sometimes caught glimpses of spotless damask and
  shining crystal, and soft-stepping waiters serving people of fashion.
</p>
<p>
  When she entered her appearance created no surprise, no consternation, as
  she had half feared it might. She seated herself at a small table alone,
  and an attentive waiter at once approached to take her order. She did not
  want a profusion; she craved a nice and tasty bite&mdash;a half dozen
  blue-points, a plump chop with cress, a something sweet&mdash;a
  creme-frappee, for instance; a glass of Rhine wine, and after all a small
  cup of black coffee.
</p>
<p>
  While waiting to be served she removed her gloves very leisurely and laid
  them beside her. Then she picked up a magazine and glanced through it,
  cutting the pages with a blunt edge of her knife. It was all very
  agreeable. The damask was even more spotless than it had seemed through
  the window, and the crystal more sparkling. There were quiet ladies and
  gentlemen, who did not notice her, lunching at the small tables like her
  own. A soft, pleasing strain of music could be heard, and a gentle breeze,
  was blowing through the window. She tasted a bite, and she read a word or
  two, and she sipped the amber wine and wiggled her toes in the silk
  stockings. The price of it made no difference. She counted the money out
  to the waiter and left an extra coin on his tray, whereupon he bowed
  before her as before a princess of royal blood.
</p>
<p>
  There was still money in her purse, and her next temptation presented
  itself in the shape of a matinee poster.
</p>
<p>
  It was a little later when she entered the theatre, the play had begun and
  the house seemed to her to be packed. But there were vacant seats here and
  there, and into one of them she was ushered, between brilliantly dressed
  women who had gone there to kill time and eat candy and display their
  gaudy attire. There were many others who were there solely for the play
  and acting. It is safe to say there was no one present who bore quite the
  attitude which Mrs. Sommers did to her surroundings. She gathered in the
  whole&mdash;stage and players and people in one wide impression, and
  absorbed it and enjoyed it. She laughed at the comedy and wept&mdash;she
  and the gaudy woman next to her wept over the tragedy. And they talked a
  little together over it. And the gaudy woman wiped her eyes and sniffled
  on a tiny square of filmy, perfumed lace and passed little Mrs. Sommers
  her box of candy.
</p>
<p>
  The play was over, the music ceased, the crowd filed out. It was like a
  dream ended. People scattered in all directions. Mrs. Sommers went to the
  corner and waited for the cable car.
</p>
<p>
  A man with keen eyes, who sat opposite to her, seemed to like the study of
  her small, pale face. It puzzled him to decipher what he saw there. In
  truth, he saw nothing-unless he were wizard enough to detect a poignant
  wish, a powerful longing that the cable car would never stop anywhere, but
  go on and on with her forever.
</p>
<p>
  <a name="link2H_4_0051" id="link2H_4_0051">
  <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
  <br /><br /><br /><br />
</div>
<h2>
  THE LOCKET
</h2>
<p>
  <a name="link2H_4_0052" id="link2H_4_0052">
  <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
  <br /><br /><br /><br />
</div>
<h3>
  I
</h3>
<p>
  One night in autumn a few men were gathered about a fire on the slope of a
  hill. They belonged to a small detachment of Confederate forces and were
  awaiting orders to march. Their gray uniforms were worn beyond the point
  of shabbiness. One of the men was heating something in a tin cup over the
  embers. Two were lying at full length a little distance away, while a
  fourth was trying to decipher a letter and had drawn close to the light.
  He had unfastened his collar and a good bit of his flannel shirt front.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What's that you got around your neck, Ned?&rdquo; asked one of the men lying in
  the obscurity.
</p>
<p>
  Ned&mdash;or Edmond&mdash;mechanically fastened another button of his
  shirt and did not reply. He went on reading his letter.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Is it your sweet heart's picture?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;'Taint no gal's picture,&rdquo; offered the man at the fire. He had removed his
  tin cup and was engaged in stirring its grimy contents with a small stick.
  &ldquo;That's a charm; some kind of hoodoo business that one o' them priests
  gave him to keep him out o' trouble. I know them Cath'lics. That's how
  come Frenchy got permoted an never got a scratch sence he's been in the
  ranks. Hey, French! aint I right?&rdquo; Edmond looked up absently from his
  letter.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What is it?&rdquo; he asked.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Aint that a charm you got round your neck?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;It must be, Nick,&rdquo; returned Edmond with a smile. &ldquo;I don't know how I
  could have gone through this year and a half without it.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  The letter had made Edmond heart sick and home sick. He stretched himself
  on his back and looked straight up at the blinking stars. But he was not
  thinking of them nor of anything but a certain spring day when the bees
  were humming in the clematis; when a girl was saying good bye to him. He
  could see her as she unclasped from her neck the locket which she fastened
  about his own. It was an old fashioned golden locket bearing miniatures of
  her father and mother with their names and the date of their marriage. It
  was her most precious earthly possession. Edmond could feel again the
  folds of the girl's soft white gown, and see the droop of the
  angel-sleeves as she circled her fair arms about his neck. Her sweet face,
  appealing, pathetic, tormented by the pain of parting, appeared before him
  as vividly as life. He turned over, burying his face in his arm and there
  he lay, still and motionless.
</p>
<p>
  The profound and treacherous night with its silence and semblance of peace
  settled upon the camp. He dreamed that the fair Octavie brought him a
  letter. He had no chair to offer her and was pained and embarrassed at the
  condition of his garments. He was ashamed of the poor food which comprised
  the dinner at which he begged her to join them.
</p>
<p>
  He dreamt of a serpent coiling around his throat, and when he strove to
  grasp it the slimy thing glided away from his clutch. Then his dream was
  clamor.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Git your duds! you! Frenchy!&rdquo; Nick was bellowing in his face. There was
  what appeared to be a scramble and a rush rather than any regulated
  movement. The hill side was alive with clatter and motion; with sudden
  up-springing lights among the pines. In the east the dawn was unfolding
  out of the darkness. Its glimmer was yet dim in the plain below.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What's it all about?&rdquo; wondered a big black bird perched in the top of the
  tallest tree. He was an old solitary and a wise one, yet he was not wise
  enough to guess what it was all about. So all day long he kept blinking
  and wondering.
</p>
<p>
  The noise reached far out over the plain and across the hills and awoke
  the little babes that were sleeping in their cradles. The smoke curled up
  toward the sun and shadowed the plain so that the stupid birds thought it
  was going to rain; but the wise one knew better.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;They are children playing a game,&rdquo; thought he. &ldquo;I shall know more about
  it if I watch long enough.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  At the approach of night they had all vanished away with their din and
  smoke. Then the old bird plumed his feathers. At last he had understood!
  With a flap of his great, black wings he shot downward, circling toward
  the plain.
</p>
<p>
  A man was picking his way across the plain. He was dressed in the garb of
  a clergyman. His mission was to administer the consolations of religion to
  any of the prostrate figures in whom there might yet linger a spark of
  life. A negro accompanied him, bearing a bucket of water and a flask of
  wine.
</p>
<p>
  There were no wounded here; they had been borne away. But the retreat had
  been hurried and the vultures and the good Samaritans would have to look
  to the dead.
</p>
<p>
  There was a soldier&mdash;a mere boy&mdash;lying with his face to the sky.
  His hands were clutching the sward on either side and his finger nails
  were stuffed with earth and bits of grass that he had gathered in his
  despairing grasp upon life. His musket was gone; he was hatless and his
  face and clothing were begrimed. Around his neck hung a gold chain and
  locket. The priest, bending over him, unclasped the chain and removed it
  from the dead soldier's neck. He had grown used to the terrors of war and
  could face them unflinchingly; but its pathos, someway, always brought the
  tears to his old, dim eyes.
</p>
<p>
  The angelus was ringing half a mile away. The priest and the negro knelt
  and murmured together the evening benediction and a prayer for the dead.
</p>
<p>
  <a name="link2H_4_0053" id="link2H_4_0053">
  <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
  <br /><br /><br /><br />
</div>
<h3>
  II
</h3>
<p>
  The peace and beauty of a spring day had descended upon the earth like a
  benediction. Along the leafy road which skirted a narrow, tortuous stream
  in central Louisiana, rumbled an old fashioned cabriolet, much the worse
  for hard and rough usage over country roads and lanes. The fat, black
  horses went in a slow, measured trot, notwithstanding constant urging on
  the part of the fat, black coachman. Within the vehicle were seated the
  fair Octavie and her old friend and neighbor, Judge Pillier, who had come
  to take her for a morning drive.
</p>
<p>
  Octavie wore a plain black dress, severe in its simplicity. A narrow belt
  held it at the waist and the sleeves were gathered into close fitting
  wristbands. She had discarded her hoopskirt and appeared not unlike a nun.
  Beneath the folds of her bodice nestled the old locket. She never
  displayed it now. It had returned to her sanctified in her eyes; made
  precious as material things sometimes are by being forever identified with
  a significant moment of one's existence.
</p>
<p>
  A hundred times she had read over the letter with which the locket had
  come back to her. No later than that morning she had again pored over it.
  As she sat beside the window, smoothing the letter out upon her knee,
  heavy and spiced odors stole in to her with the songs of birds and the
  humming of insects in the air.
</p>
<p>
  She was so young and the world was so beautiful that there came over her a
  sense of unreality as she read again and again the priest's letter. He
  told of that autumn day drawing to its close, with the gold and the red
  fading out of the west, and the night gathering its shadows to cover the
  faces of the dead. Oh! She could not believe that one of those dead was
  her own! with visage uplifted to the gray sky in an agony of supplication.
  A spasm of resistance and rebellion seized and swept over her. Why was the
  spring here with its flowers and its seductive breath if he was dead! Why
  was she here! What further had she to do with life and the living!
</p>
<p>
  Octavie had experienced many such moments of despair, but a blessed
  resignation had never failed to follow, and it fell then upon her like a
  mantle and enveloped her.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I shall grow old and quiet and sad like poor Aunt Tavie,&rdquo; she murmured to
  herself as she folded the letter and replaced it in the secretary. Already
  she gave herself a little demure air like her Aunt Tavie. She walked with
  a slow glide in unconscious imitation of Mademoiselle Tavie whom some
  youthful affliction had robbed of earthly compensation while leaving her
  in possession of youth's illusions.
</p>
<p>
  As she sat in the old cabriolet beside the father of her dead lover, again
  there came to Octavie the terrible sense of loss which had assailed her so
  often before. The soul of her youth clamored for its rights; for a share
  in the world's glory and exultation. She leaned back and drew her veil a
  little closer about her face. It was an old black veil of her Aunt
  Tavie's. A whiff of dust from the road had blown in and she wiped her
  cheeks and her eyes with her soft, white handkerchief, a homemade
  handkerchief, fabricated from one of her old fine muslin petticoats.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Will you do me the favor, Octavie,&rdquo; requested the judge in the courteous
  tone which he never abandoned, &ldquo;to remove that veil which you wear. It
  seems out of harmony, someway, with the beauty and promise of the day.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  The young girl obediently yielded to her old companion's wish and
  unpinning the cumbersome, sombre drapery from her bonnet, folded it neatly
  and laid it upon the seat in front of her.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Ah! that is better; far better!&rdquo; he said in a tone expressing unbounded
  relief. &ldquo;Never put it on again, dear.&rdquo; Octavie felt a little hurt; as if
  he wished to debar her from share and parcel in the burden of affliction
  which had been placed upon all of them. Again she drew forth the old
  muslin handkerchief.
</p>
<p>
  They had left the big road and turned into a level plain which had
  formerly been an old meadow. There were clumps of thorn trees here and
  there, gorgeous in their spring radiance. Some cattle were grazing off in
  the distance in spots where the grass was tall and luscious. At the far
  end of the meadow was the towering lilac hedge, skirting the lane that led
  to Judge Pillier's house, and the scent of its heavy blossoms met them
  like a soft and tender embrace of welcome.
</p>
<p>
  As they neared the house the old gentleman placed an arm around the girl's
  shoulders and turning her face up to him he said: &ldquo;Do you not think that
  on a day like this, miracles might happen? When the whole earth is vibrant
  with life, does it not seem to you, Octavie, that heaven might for once
  relent and give us back our dead?&rdquo; He spoke very low, advisedly, and
  impressively. In his voice was an old quaver which was not habitual and
  there was agitation in every line of his visage. She gazed at him with
  eyes that were full of supplication and a certain terror of joy.
</p>
<p>
  They had been driving through the lane with the towering hedge on one side
  and the open meadow on the other. The horses had somewhat quickened their
  lazy pace. As they turned into the avenue leading to the house, a whole
  choir of feathered songsters fluted a sudden torrent of melodious greeting
  from their leafy hiding places.
</p>
<p>
  Octavie felt as if she had passed into a stage of existence which was like
  a dream, more poignant and real than life. There was the old gray house
  with its sloping eaves. Amid the blur of green, and dimly, she saw
  familiar faces and heard voices as if they came from far across the
  fields, and Edmond was holding her. Her dead Edmond; her living Edmond,
  and she felt the beating of his heart against her and the agonizing
  rapture of his kisses striving to awake her. It was as if the spirit of
  life and the awakening spring had given back the soul to her youth and
  bade her rejoice.
</p>
<p>
  It was many hours later that Octavie drew the locket from her bosom and
  looked at Edmond with a questioning appeal in her glance.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;It was the night before an engagement,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;In the hurry of the
  encounter, and the retreat next day, I never missed it till the fight was
  over. I thought of course I had lost it in the heat of the struggle, but
  it was stolen.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Stolen,&rdquo; she shuddered, and thought of the dead soldier with his face
  uplifted to the sky in an agony of supplication.
</p>
<p>
  Edmond said nothing; but he thought of his messmate; the one who had lain
  far back in the shadow; the one who had said nothing.
</p>
<p>
  <a name="link2H_4_0054" id="link2H_4_0054">
  <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
  <br /><br /><br /><br />
</div>
<h2>
  A REFLECTION
</h2>
<p>
  Some people are born with a vital and responsive energy. It not only
  enables them to keep abreast of the times; it qualifies them to furnish in
  their own personality a good bit of the motive power to the mad pace. They
  are fortunate beings. They do not need to apprehend the significance of
  things. They do not grow weary nor miss step, nor do they fall out of rank
  and sink by the wayside to be left contemplating the moving procession.
</p>
<p>
  Ah! that moving procession that has left me by the road-side! Its
  fantastic colors are more brilliant and beautiful than the sun on the
  undulating waters. What matter if souls and bodies are failing beneath the
  feet of the ever-pressing multitude! It moves with the majestic rhythm of
  the spheres. Its discordant clashes sweep upward in one harmonious tone
  that blends with the music of other worlds&mdash;to complete God's
  orchestra.
</p>
<p>
  It is greater than the stars&mdash;that moving procession of human energy;
  greater than the palpitating earth and the things growing thereon. Oh! I
  could weep at being left by the wayside; left with the grass and the
  clouds and a few dumb animals. True, I feel at home in the society of
  these symbols of life's immutability. In the procession I should feel the
  crushing feet, the clashing discords, the ruthless hands and stifling
  breath. I could not hear the rhythm of the march.
</p>
<p>
  Salve! ye dumb hearts. Let us be still and wait by the roadside.
</p>
