<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>The Lilies</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="the-lilies" epub:type="volume se:short-story">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Lilies</h2>
			<p>That little vagabond Mamouche amused himself one afternoon by letting down the fence rails that protected <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Billy’s young crop of cotton and corn. He had first looked carefully about him to make sure there was no witness to this piece of rascality. Then he crossed the lane and did the same with the Widow Angèle’s fence, thereby liberating Toto, the white calf who stood disconsolately penned up on the other side.</p>
			<p>It was not ten seconds before Toto was frolicking madly in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Billy’s crop, and Mamouche⁠—the young scamp⁠—was running swiftly down the lane, laughing fiendishly to himself as he went.</p>
			<p>He could not at first decide whether there could be more fun in letting Toto demolish things at his pleasure, or in warning <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Billy of the calf’s presence in the field. But the latter course commended itself as possessing a certain refinement of perfidy.</p>
			<p>“Ho, the’a, you!” called out Mamouche to one of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Billy’s hands, when he got around to where the men were at work; “you betta go yon’a an’ see ’bout that calf o’ Ma’me Angèle; he done broke in the fiel’ an’ ’bout to finish the crop, him.” Then Mamouche went and sat behind a big tree, where, unobserved, he could laugh to his heart’s content</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Billy’s fury was unbounded when he learned that Madame Angèle’s calf was eating up and trampling down his corn. At once he sent a detachment of men and boys to expel the animal from the field. Others were required to repair the damaged fence; while he himself, boiling with wrath, rode up the lane on his wicked black charger.</p>
			<p>But merely to look upon the devastation was not enough for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Billy. He dismounted from his horse, and strode belligerently up to Madame Angèle’s door, upon which he gave, with his riding-whip, a couple of sharp raps that plainly indicated the condition of his mind.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Billy looked taller and broader than ever as he squared himself on the gallery of Madame Angèle’s small and modest house. She herself half-opened the door, a pale, sweet-looking woman, somewhat bewildered, and holding a piece of sewing in her hands. Little Marie Louise was beside her, with big, inquiring, frightened eyes.</p>
			<p>“Well, Madam!” blustered <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Billy, “this is a pretty piece of work! That young beast of yours is a fence-breaker, Madam, and ought to be shot.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, non, non, M’sieur. Toto’s too li’le; I’m sho he can’t break any fence, him.”</p>
			<p>“Don’t contradict me, Madam. I say he’s a fence-breaker. There’s the proof before your eyes. He ought to be shot, I say, and⁠—don’t let it occur again, Madam.” And <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Billy turned and stamped down the steps with a great clatter of spurs as he went.</p>
			<p>Madame Angèle was at the time in desperate haste to finish a young lady’s Easter dress, and she could not afford to let Toto’s escapade occupy her to any extent, much as she regretted it. But little Marie Louise was greatly impressed by the affair. She went out in the yard to Toto, who was under the fig-tree, looking not half so shamefaced as he ought. The child, with arms clasped around the little fellow’s white shaggy neck, scolded him roundly.</p>
			<p>“Ain’t you shame’, Toto, to go eat up <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Billy’s cotton an’ co’n? W’at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Billy ev’a done to you, to go do him that way? If you been hungry, Toto, w’y you did’n’ come like always an’ put yo’ head in the winda? I’m goin’ tell yo’ maman w’en she come back f’om the woods to ’s’evenin’, M’sieur.”</p>
			<p>Marie Louise only ceased her mild rebuke when she fancied she saw a penitential look in Toto’s big soft eyes.</p>
			<p>She had a keen instinct of right and justice for so young a little maid. And all the afternoon, and long into the night, she was disturbed by the thought of the unfortunate accident. Of course, there could be no question of repaying <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Billy with money; she and her mother had none. Neither had they cotton and corn with which to make good the loss he had sustained through them.</p>
			<p>But had they not something far more beautiful and precious than cotton and corn? Marie Louise thought with delight of that row of Easter lilies on their tall green stems, ranged thick along the sunny side of the house.</p>
			<p>The assurance that she would, after all, be able to satisfy <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Billy’s just anger, was a very sweet one. And soothed by it, Marie Louise soon fell asleep and dreamt a grotesque dream: that the lilies were having a stately dance on the green in the moonlight, and were inviting <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Billy to join them.</p>
			<p>The following day, when it was nearing noon, Marie Louise said to her mamma: “Maman, can I have some of the Easter lily, to do with like I want?”</p>
			<p>Madame Angèle was just then testing the heat of an iron with which to press out the seams in the young lady’s Easter dress, and she answered a shade impatiently:</p>
			<p>“Yes, yes; <i xml:lang="fr">va t’en, chérie</i>,” thinking that her little girl wanted to pluck a lily or two.</p>
			<p>So the child took a pair of old shears from her mother’s basket, and out she went to where the tall, perfumed lilies were nodding, and shaking off from their glistening petals the rain-drops with which a passing cloud had just laughingly pelted them.</p>
			<p>Snip, snap, went the shears here and there, and never did Marie Louise stop plying them till scores of those long-stemmed lilies lay upon the ground. There were far more than she could hold in her small hands, so she literally clasped the great bunch in her arms, and staggered to her feet with it.</p>
			<p>Marie Louise was intent upon her purpose, and lost no time in its accomplishment. She was soon trudging earnestly down the lane with her sweet burden, never stopping, and only one glancing aside to cast a reproachful look at Toto, whom she had not wholly forgiven.</p>
			<p>She did not in the least mind that the dogs barked, or that the darkies laughed at her. She went straight on to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Billy’s big house, and right into the dining-room where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Billy sat eating his dinner all alone.</p>
			<p>It was a finely-furnished room, but disorderly⁠—very disorderly, as an old bachelor’s personal surroundings sometimes are. A black boy stood waiting upon the table. When little Marie Louise suddenly appeared, with that armful of lilies, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Billy seemed for a moment transfixed at the sight.</p>
			<p>“Well⁠—bless⁠—my soul! what’s all this? What’s all this?” he questioned, with staring eyes.</p>
			<p>Marie Louise had already made a little courtesy. Her sunbonnet had fallen back, leaving exposed her pretty round head; and her sweet brown eyes were full of confidence as they looked into <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Billy’s.</p>
			<p>“I’m bring some lilies to pay back fo’ yo’ cotton an’ co’n w’at Toto eat all up, M’sieur.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Billy turned savagely upon Pompey. “What are you laughing at, you black rascal? Leave the room!”</p>
			<p>Pompey, who out of mistaken zeal had doubled himself with merriment, was too accustomed to the admonition to heed it literally, and he only made a pretense of withdrawing from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Billy’s elbow.</p>
			<p>“Lilies! well, upon my⁠—isn’t it the little one from across the lane?”</p>
			<p>“Dat’s who,” affirmed Pompey, cautiously insinuating himself again into favor.</p>
			<p>“Lilies! who ever heard the like? Why, the baby’s buried under ’em. Set ’em down somewhere, little one; anywhere.” And Marie Louise, glad to be relieved from the weight of the great cluster, dumped them all on the table close to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Billy.</p>
			<p>The perfume that came from the damp, massed flowers was heavy and almost sickening in its pungency. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Billy quivered a little, and drew involuntarily back, as if from an unexpected assailant, when the odor reached him. He had been making cotton and corn for so many years, he had forgotten there were such things as lilies in the world.</p>
			<p>“Kiar ’em out? fling ’em ’way?” questioned Pompey, who had observed his master cunningly.</p>
			<p>“Let ’em alone! Keep your hands off them! Leave the room, you outlandish black scamp! What are you standing there for? Can’t you set the Mamzelle a place at table, and draw up a chair?”</p>
			<p>So Marie Louise⁠—perched upon a fine old-fashioned chair, supplemented by a <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Webster’s Unabridged</i>⁠—sat down to dine with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Billy.</p>
			<p>She had never eaten in company with so peculiar a gentleman before; so irascible toward the inoffensive Pompey, and so courteous to herself. But she was not ill at ease, and conducted herself properly as her mamma had taught her how.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Billy was anxious that she should enjoy her dinner, and began by helping her generously to Jambalaya. When she had tasted it she made no remark, only laid down her fork, and looked composedly before her.</p>
			<p>“Why, bless me! what ails the little one? You don’t eat your rice.”</p>
			<p>“It ain’t cook’, M’sieur,” replied Marie Louise politely.</p>
			<p>Pompey nearly strangled in his attempt to smother an explosion.</p>
			<p>“Of course it isn’t cooked,” echoed <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Billy, excitedly, pushing away his plate. “What do you mean, setting a mess of that sort before human beings? Do you take us for a couple of⁠—of rice-birds? What are you standing there for; can’t you look up some jam or something to keep the young one from starving? Where’s all that jam I saw stewing a while back, here?”</p>
			<p>Pompey withdrew, and soon returned with a platter of black-looking jam. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Billy ordered cream for it. Pompey reported there was none.</p>
			<p>“No cream, with twenty-five cows on the plantation if there’s one!” cried <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Billy, almost springing from his chair with indignation.</p>
			<p>“Aunt Printy ’low she sot de pan o’ cream on de winda-sell, suh, an’ Unc’ Jonah come ’long an’ tu’n it cl’ar ova; neva lef a drap in de pan.”</p>
			<p>But evidently the jam, with or without cream, was as distasteful to Marie Louise as the rice was; for after tasting it gingerly she laid away her spoon as she had done before.</p>
			<p>“O, no! little one; you don’t tell me it isn’t cooked this time,” laughed <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Billy. “I saw the thing boiling a day and a half. Wasn’t it a day and a half, Pompey? if you know how to tell the truth.”</p>
			<p>“Aunt Printy alluz do cooks her p’esarves tell dey plumb done, sho,” agreed Pompey.</p>
			<p>“It’s burn’, M’sieur,” said Marie Louise, politely, but decidedly, to the utter confusion of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Billy, who was as mortified as could be at the failure of his dinner to please his fastidious little visitor.</p>
			<p>Well, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Billy thought of Marie Louise a good deal after that; as long as the lilies lasted. And they lasted long, for he had the whole household employed in taking care of them. Often he would chuckle to himself: “The little rogue, with her black eyes and her lilies! And the rice wasn’t cooked, if you please; and the jam was burnt. And the best of it is, she was right.”</p>
			<p>But when the lilies withered finally, and had to be thrown away, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Billy donned his best suit, a starched shirt and fine silk necktie. Thus attired, he crossed the lane to carry his somewhat tardy apologies to Madame Angèle and Mamzelle Marie Louise, and to pay them a first visit.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
